---
title: "The Elementary Theory of the $2$-Category of Small Categories"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink:
venue: "Online"
date: 2024-06-05
location: "Masaryk University Algebra Seminar"
---

Lawvere's Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets (ETCS) posits that
the category Set is a well-pointed elementary topos with natural numbers
object satisfying the axiom of choice. This provides a category
theoretic foundation for mathematics which axiomatises the properties of
function composition in contrast to Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the
axiom of choice (ZFC), which axiomatises sets and their membership
relation. Furthermore, ETCS augmented with the axiom schema of
replacement can be shown to be equiconsistent with ZFC.   

<br>

In this talk, I will present a categorification of ETCS which
axiomatises the 2-category of small categories, functors and natural
transformations; this is the elementary theory of the 2-category of
small categories (ET2CSC) of the title. This extends Bourke's
characterisation of categories internal to a category E with pullbacks
to the setting where E satisfies the extra properties of ETCS. Important
2-categorical definitions I will introduce are 2-well-pointedness, the
full subobject classifier and the categorified axiom of choice. The main
conclusion is that ET2CSC is `Morita biequivalent' with ETCS, meaning
that the two theories have biequivalent 2-categories of models.  

<br>

I will also describe how Shulman and Weber's ideas on discrete
opfibration classifiers can be used to incorporate replacement, in a way
reminiscent of algebraic set theory.  

<br>

This talk is based on joint work with Adrian Miranda.
